## Earlgrey SiVal Test Development Guidelines

## General Guidelines

> **TL;DR;** It is currently not possible to directly connect opentitantool to a
> `sim_dv` binary to simulate sival tests with a Rust component. In the absence
> of that mechanism, it is hence recommended to write sival tests in a
> DV-friendly way. This ensures that porting and running these tests in `sim_dv`
> becomes straightforward, should the need arise to debug a test in simulation
> during sival. To that end a set of guidelines and recommendations are
> presented in this document to enhance portability of tests among platforms.

As a general guidance, for tests that should run in DV, the following
recommendations apply:

### Prefer simple self-contained tests

Keep the test as simple and device centric where possible. This means that
interaction with the host should be minimized and the control flow and checks
should be implemented mostly on the device side. It is however useful to send
detailed test status and checksums to the host side for verification using
`LOG_INFO` for example.

### Maintain `sim_dv` patterns

If the test to be developed is an existing `sim_dv` test that needs to be
converted, the existing vseq's interaction pattern should be followed.

*   Backdoor writes should be replaced with ujson mem commands.
*   When translating vseq's that synchronize using the `cfg.sw_test_status_vif`,
    use the test status update printed out through `LOG_INFO` (UART) on the host
    side.

### Limit the use of complex structures to communicate with the host

Serialization and deserialization of data is time consuming in DV. Moreover, the
DV environment does not currently have support for the ujson mechanism.

*   Restrict the use of ujson payloads to complex tests that cannot be
    implemented in another way.
*   Prefer the use of simpler communication methods such as UART, GPIOs or the
    ujson mem command mechanism.
*   Complex test examples include:

    *   Long running tests that are unsuitable for simulation due to their
        runtime.
    *   Tests relying on structured data such as complex cryptographic tests
    *   Tests of I/O IPs that require structured data

### Support `test_rom` and `rom` targets

SiVal test targets must be emulated using the production `rom`, but `test_rom`
configurations are required for simulation environments to save time. Make sure
to run test cases with both configurations on the FPGA.

### Limit the number of OTP transitions

OTP transitions are usually restricted to test cases that can only be run inside
a secure environment. This is because devices in non-PROD life cycle stages are
considered open samples. In addition to this, there is limited access to silicon
in larger quantities during early bring up. Test execution thus needs to be
planned such that test cases are executed on a given OTP configuration without
requiring OTP writes:

*   Verify test expectations against the device's lifecycle stage, preferring
    one test Bazel target per life cycle configuration.
*   A similar approach is required for differing OTP configurations. Use custom
    OTP images in Bazel as dependencies in test cases, so that it is easier to
    determine how many configurations are needed for SiVal activities. Consider
    migrating DV test targets to use OTP images generated by Bazel (low
    priority).
*   The exception to these rules are manufacturing and provisioning test cases
    which are required to walk through various life cycle stages and OTP
    settings.

## OTP Images

Silicon bring-up and validation activities have to be planned in a way that
minimizes the number of OTP configurations given that there may be limited
availability of samples during early post-silicon stages.

`//hw/ip/otp_ctrl/data/earlgrey_a0_skus/sival/BUILD` contains the OTP
configurations used in Silicon Validation (SiVal) for the EarlGrey design.

### `:otp_img_test_unlocked0_manuf_empty`

Represents the initial DUT test unlocked state, which is only applicable for
`test_unlocked0` life cycle state. All other test unlocked states require the
`SECRET0` partition to be configured.

ROM execution is disabled in this configuration. JTAG should be used to
bootstrap code into SRAM or FLASH.

### `:otp_img_test_locked0_manuf_initialized`

Represents a DUT with the `SECRET0` partition initialized in the `test_locked0`
life cycle state. This configuration will be generally used to lock the DUT
before shipping to the Final Test (FT) test house.

### `:otp_img_test_unlocked{1..7}_manuf_initialized`

Represents an initialized DUT configuration. Available on `test_unlock` states
1-7. An initialized DUT contains the following partitions configured:

*  `SECRET0`
*  `CREATOR_SW_CFG`
*  `OWNER_SW_CFG`

Notes:

1. ROM execution is enabled in this configuration.
2. JTAG use may require setting the ROM in bootstrap mode to avoid getting
   watchdog timeouts.
3. Flash scrambling is disabled during manufacturing process at this stage.
   Use OTP images with the `manuf_personalized` suffix to test flash
   scrambling.

### `:otp_img_{lc_state}_manuf_individualized`

Represents an individualized DUT configuration. Available on the following
life cycle states:

*  `test_unlocked{1..7}`
*  `dev`
*  `prod`
*  `prod_end`

The following OTP partitions are configured:

*  `SECRET0`
*  `CREATOR_SW_CFG`
*  `OWNER_SW_CFG`
*  `HW_CFG`

The following `HW_CFG` settings are hardcoded. Other settings will be tested
inside a secure environment.

Setting                | Value
:----------------------| :----
EN_SRAM_IFETCH         | True
EN_CSRNG_SW_APP_READ   | True
EN_ENTROPY_SRC_FW_READ | True
EN_ENTROPY_SRC_FW_OVER | True

Notes:

1. ROM execution is enabled in this configuration.
2. JTAG use may require setting the ROM in bootstrap mode to avoid getting
   watchdog timeouts.
3. Flash scrambling is disabled during manufacturing process at this stage.
   Use OTP images with the `manuf_personalized` suffix to test flash
   scrambling.

### `:otp_img_{lc_state}_manuf_personalized`

Represents a personalized DUT configuration. Available on the following
life cycle states:

*  `dev`
*  `prod`
*  `prod_end`

The following OTP partitions are configured:

*  `SECRET0`
*  `SECRET1`
*  `SECRET2`
*  `CREATOR_SW_CFG`
*  `OWNER_SW_CFG`
*  `HW_CFG`

## Emulation Targets

`//hw/top_earlgrey/BUILD` contains the targets used for silicon emulation for
the EarlGrey design. The following sections describe the targets in more
detail.

### `:fpga_cw310_sival`

FPGA configuration used to emulate silicon targets. This rule can be used by
targets that require execution at the `rom_ext` stage level in flash, as well
as SRAM programs. Use the `fpga_cw310_sival_rom_ext` execution environment to
emulate silicon targets containing a `rom_ext` stage.

Configuration:

```python
{
    rom = "//sw/device/silicon_creator/rom:rom_with_fake_keys",
    otp = "//hw/ip/otp_ctrl/data/earlgrey_a0_skus/sival_bringup:otp_img_prod_manuf_personalized",
}
```

### `:fpga_cw310_sival_rom_ext`

FPGA configuration used to emulate silicon targets containing a `rom_ext`
stage.This is the recommended option for test cases that implemented to run in
`prod` or `prod_end` life cycle states.
