# Top Earlgrey

## Specification

The datasheet and specification of Earlgrey is located [here](./doc/datasheet.md).

## Tool: TopGen

Top Earlgrey is being generated by the integration tool, topgen
(`util/topgen.py`). Please do not revise any RTL file that lives in an `*autogen/`
directory. This applies both to all RTL files which make up the top design (under
`rtl/autogen/*.sv`) as well as to all the auto-generated/templated IP blocks under
`ip_autogen/*`.

### How to (re)generate the top design

The full top design, including all auto-generated IPs, dv and sw collateral, and
several others, is generated through `topgen.py`. To (re)generate it, run the command
below from the project root directory:

```console
util/topgen.py -t hw/top_earlgrey/data/top_earlgrey.hjson -s hw/top_earlgrey/data/top_earlgrey_seed.testing.hjson
```

In terms of the top level design hierarchy, it generates the files below (all in `rtl/autogen/`):

- `earlgrey_pd_{main,aon}.sv`: Power domain level wrappers which instantiate all IPs
that belong to the respective domain, including all required connections between them
- `top_earlgrey.sv`: "Logic" top level design, which instantiates the power domain level
wrappers described above, connects them with each other and feeds any signals through
that are required at chip level (see below)
- `chip_earlgrey_{asic,cw340,verilator}.sv`: The "definitive" top (chip) level of the design;
one file per target (ASIC, CW340, Verilator), with target-specific cells, port list, and
connections. Instantiates the `top_earlgrey` module described above as well as technology
and target specific modules/cells such as, e.g., clock generators or physical pad cells


### Adding new blocks into top level
- Modify `data/top_earlgrey.hjson` to include a new module in the `module` section.
- Modify `data/xbar_{main,peri}.hjson` for the TileLink connectivity.
- Modify the `inter_module`, `pinmux`, and `targets` sections in case the newly added
module requires connections to/from other modules or the chip level, that are not auto-
generated (i.e., anything but TileLink bus ports, interrupts, alerts, comportable IO,
wakeup requests, as well as clocks and resets)

### Modify configurations

Main configuration for Top Earlgrey is in `data/top_earlgrey.hjson`. The users
need to specify the list of peripherals, memories, crossbars, and the interrupts
in the configuration file. The tool then reads relevant information from the
each peripheral blocks' configuration. For instance, if `uart` module is used,
the tool reads `hw/ip/uart/data/uart{_reg}.hjson` and parses the information such
as input/output, the size of its register space, and interrupts.

For the memories, the tool utilizes the `type` and instantiates relevant modules
including the converter from TL-UL interface to the native interfaces (SRAM,
ROM, eFlash). The user only needs to describe the base address and the memory
size.

The crossbar should be defined in the separate file. Please take a look at
`data/xbar_main.hjson` as an example. In the top configuration, it needs to
define the xbar and the clock, then the tool calls tlgen library to create the
crossbar design. Please remind that the instance name in the crossbar and that
in the module field should be matched for topgen to create fields that tlgen
uses.

### Modify the template

The "main" top templates which make up the meat of the design are
`templates/earlgrey_pd_main.sv.tpl` and `templates/earlgrey_pd_aon.sv.tpl`.
However, in most cases, it isn't required to modify these template files. For
instance, to add a new IP to the design, the user just needs to add the IP to
the `module` section of `data/top_earlgrey.hjson` and revise the crossbar connections
in the crossbar configuration (i.e., in `data/xbar_{main,peri}.hjson`).

There might be some cases that need to revise the templates. As of now, a few
things are hard-coded such as a couple of connections to the RISC-V Ibex core and
its debug module. If any of these modules need to be revised or a new IP needs to be
added that does not adhere to the comportability spec, manual adaptions to the templates
may actually be required.
